WHEN GLACIERS GO


12/24/2020

Sangbo Intro
1
The sun hasn’t even risen behind the steep sandy cliffs of Chambale, but the water splashing over his calloused hands shakes Sangbo from the lingering fog of sleep bringing him into the present moment with a cold jolt. He pushes a medium sized boulder in front of the small stream and redirects the water vaguely towards a neat row of chest high apple trees rising from the river rocks strewn through the landscape. 
2
He grabs a shovel and chases the water as it snakes its way towards the first tree. He digs a small channel around the tree racing to finish before the water trickles past. There is nothing exceptional watching Sangbo chase water through his apple orchard, yet he has somehow been selected out of all the generations before to lead this chase. The divot encompassing the small tree begins to fill, creating a dirty puddle of water. Sangbo moves on to the next tree. 
3
Around him are more than 1,000 trees stretching across a dried river bed each holding their own against the unforgiving Himalayan climate. The trees seem to wear the struggle of high altitude existence; they are small, covered in dust, many bent from the ruthless winds. As sad as they look, they are the only trees for as far as the eye can see - a symbol of resistance against the poor odds that nature seemed to be pushing Sangbo’s way. 
4
Digging another channel, he is silhouetted by a mountain rising above him; 10 miles behind that mountain is the village of Dhey. About eight years ago the water in Dhey started disappearing. There had always been enough to grow food and run the mill for as long as his grandparents' memory could go back, but change was afoot. The water splashes into the trough around the tree in front of him and Sangbo moves on, channeling the water as he goes. He falls into a methodical rhythm, moving tree to tree, chasing the water he had come here to find. 
5
Overview of Water and the Himalaya.
Nestled between India and Chinese controlled Tibet, you find Nepal. If you were to be looking at a world map flat on a table, you may struggle to find it; turn that map into a mountain topography and all you see is Nepal. Eight of the world's ten tallest mountains call Nepal home. The Great Himalayan Range tears across Nepal’s northern border forming a natural wall between Nepal and the roof of the world - Chinese controlled Tibet.
6
With these mountains comes, Ice and with Ice - water. The Himalayas are known as the water tower of the world. The ice in Himalayan glaciers account for _____ of the world’s fresh water supply and ______ of this water is in Nepal itself. As climate change has changed weather patterns, droughts have become more common and more severe which means that these water sources are more needed than ever. 
7
Countries like India and Pakistan have even gone to war over who will control glaciers. 
8
Although glacial water sources are integral to the health and wellbeing of millions of people, they are melting faster than ever. Current estimates conclude that over a third of Himalayan glaciers will be melted before 2100. Many glaciers in the Himalayas are fractions of the size they were even 10 years ago. [[[[explanation of data viz showing glacier size today vs. previously.]]] 
9
It is clear that glacial melt will soon impact billions of people around the world downstream, but those that live within the Himalaya are already seeing dramatic water shortages that have proved to be a forcing function driving broad cultural changes. One such community, the people from the village of Dhey, is where you find Sangbo and his wife Lhakpa. 
10
Lhakpa apple picking
Lhakpa cleanly pulls an apple from the tree in front of her and gently drops it into the basket lying on the ground. She can vaguely see her husband Sangbo in the distance irrigating. Snap, another apple off the tree into the basket. The harvest is not as good this year as it was last year. Even if it was, there is no news whether the truck will be able to make it to their village this year. Regardless, she shoulders her basket and stumbles through the expanse of river rock towards her home in Chambale. 
11
Arriving home, she drops her basket in the kitchen looking around at the lightly furnished interior as if trying to will it into feeling familiar. Outside there’s a loud clattering, the sound of the community tractor negotiating with the large river stones moving through the rough landscape trouncing any of those unlucky enough to be aboard. 
12
As the grumbling machine grows nearer, the engine cuts and you can hear a _____ year old boy’s voice: “ tashi delay! - Thank you goodbye.” She joyfully moves towards the door just in time to see a ______ year old half jump half bounce out of the tractor’s trailer. No sooner do his feet hit the ground he runs into the house full speed ahead greeting Lhakpa, his mother, declaring he’s arrived home from the months at school. 


Explanation of water plight of people that live in himalaya. (rivers going out from glaciers map viz).
13
As glacial melt has increased, scientists have begun to measure the rate of melting. According to one study the melting of the Himalayan glaciers has more than doubled in the past 20 years when compared to the previous 20 years. On average a typical glacier loses more than a vertical foot and half of ice each year.
14
As this ice melts the water trickles downstream joining into the streams that supply water to billions of people. For most of those downstream, glacial melt has not necessarily caused a noticeable difference in water supply. More water melting off of glaciers typically just means more water going into oceans and perhaps slight increases in water in seasons that may be dry. However, as you move upstream, this story begins to change. 
15
Those that live in close proximity to glaciers, the people of Dhey, and other communities in the Himalaya are often dependent on groundwater; springs fed by consistent glacial melt patterns. Historically villages have formed around such sources rather than the large river tributaries as ground water is clean, the village is not at risk from seasonal flooding, and the soil is typically much better for farming. 
16
Unfortunately, as glacial melt patterns have changed, the groundwater distribution has also changed. In many areas groundwater fed springs are no longer consistently producing the water needed to support the agricultural practices of a village. The closer a village is to it’s glacial water source, the more at risk it is of losing its water source. As glacial melt patterns have quickly changed, many villages have no other choice but to pack up and leave; leaving behind their homes and ancient way of life like ghosts littered about the himalayan tundra. 
17
Grandpa monologue working with Tashi to get the mill to turn. 
10 miles away from Songbo, Lahkpa, and the village of Chambale, Dorjay grunts and struggles to get traction on the dusty ground, his 70-year-old knees protesting. The flat millstone barely moves as he throws his weight behind it. Tashi joins in and pushes alongside her husband. A pile of buckwheat, their harvest for the season sits off to the side waiting to be ground. As they push together the heavy disk shaped stone moves, but shows no interest in maintaining any velocity. 
18
“There is no water, Dorjay, we must add more to get the mill turning.” Dorjay nods with pursed lips, grabs his trowel, and starts walking uphill. The early morning sun has not yet struck the village of Dhey; frost still lingers on the grass and sporadic plants that have managed to survive. He fingers the worn wood on his trowel. Where his hands rest there is a well earned polish from years of planting, tending, and harvesting crops they would depend on throughout the year. His swinging trowel echoes across the landscape a steady cadence against the metronome of time signaling each season's change. 
19
As he crests a hill stepping into the warmth of the rising sun, he’s enveloped in a herd of goats being shepherded high into the mountains for the day. Eight years ago, before the water supply started to show signs of running dry, he would have crossed paths with several friends and neighbors; today, he’s only walking among a lonely herd of goats it can get so lonely in this village that he often has trouble even finding one other person to help him plow his field. 
20
As he steps over a pile of Yak dung he looks at the large puddle in front of him. This is the daily water supply for the village. It was supposed to be Dorjay’s neighbor’s turn to irrigate their field with the water, but unfortunately for the neighbor there just wasn’t enough to run the mill and irrigate a field today; the field would have to wait. He swings his trowel, opening up a small channel for water to pass into the divot running towards the mill. Methodically Dorjay pushes earth around opening the channel wider. As water rushes into the new channel to greet his trowel and rush downhill, he follows making his way back down towards the mill.
21
Nearing the mud hut surrounding the mill, you can hear the fruits of his labor - the low grumble of the millstone sliding along the stone ground driven by the water he released from above. As he pokes his head in the door you can see Tashi methodically adding small handfuls of buckwheat to the center of the churning stone. Handful after handful, turn after turn. It’s hard not to wonder whether this might be the last time they’ll run this mill.
22
Explanation of the moving process and why they started growing apples. (could highlight the fields they plant now and fields they don’t plant and apple tree orchards) mention altitude and precarious farming situation. 
Dhey is located in a valley roughly _______ miles from it’s glacial water source. The water coming off of the glaciers flow through two different serpentine routes into the Kali Gandaki river which in turn flows through the Deep Gandaki gorge snaking its way around fourteen of this planet's tallest peaks. Eventually the Gandaki finds its way out of Nepal meeting the Ganges in Bihar, India and eventually dumping out into the Bay of Bengal. 
23
As glacial melt flows from the glacier into the Kali Gandaki, some amount is absorbed as groundwater. This groundwater, filtered by the earth and emerging as freshwater springs is what the people of Dhey have depended on for their livelihood. As the glaciers above Dhey have receded and glacial melt has accelerated, it has caused the groundwater stores for the village of Dhey to greatly diminish to the point that it can no longer sustain their village.
24
Around five years ago the village came together and decided that the only thing they could do was move. The problem is that they did not have a consistent water supply other than the river anywhere nearby. They began to consider moving to the river, but found that the banks could not sustain traditional agriculture. As they fought to survive on an ever dwindling water supply, some members of the community that spent time in Kathmandu came across the idea of growing apples. Apples, are one of the few fruits that can survive elements.
25
It seemed crazy to many in the village at first, but as the village assessed their options it seemed to be the most logical solution. They would have to move their home and stake their livelihoods on growing apples near the river. 
26
Tenzing showing up in Dhey talking about everyone that has left.
Tenzing picks his leg up and wraps his mom’s sari around his fingers and wrist like a shoddy climbing harness. “Smack!” The front wheel of the motor bike once again goes airborne as does Tenzing, his mom Lhakpa, and his father Sangbo. The front wheel touches back down, you can smell the rubber digging into the Himalayan shale covering what is supposed to be a road. In unison the three of them rush to meet the motorbike still skittering down the 14,000 ft. mountain pass toward Dhey. 
27
Tenzing collides hard into the gas tank, but deftly kicks his leg away from the hot exhaust pipe. Two days of trouncing through mountains coming back from school his body might as well be a rug being shaken out by his mother, but it beats walking all the way home like he used to. 
28
Until recently there wasn’t even a road connecting the new village to the old village. Around one more bend he sees Dhey come into view. A few harrowing bumps later and he is jumping off the motorbike running into his old home yelling for his Grandma, Grandpa, and brother Pema. without warning pema, Tenzing’s ____ year old brother comes running down the stairs colliding with Tenzing half hug half tackle.
29
Together they sprint into the yard. Bounding over scattered hay, they make there way onto the path leading through the village of Dhey. Deftly they dodge the zho’s (yak cow hybrids) lingering in the path and the Tibetan mastiffs bark in excitement. They wrestle for a little while, but soon grow tired. 
30
Sitting next to the row of prayer wheels in the center of their village Tenzing points to a house nearby, “that family is now in Tange, they’ve left the village.” Pointing to a few mud houses clumped together in one side of the village, “Those are all empty now, they’ve moved down to Chambale permanently.” Seemingly bored by these facts of life Pema starts walking towards the east side of the village.
31
They walk over to a high mud wall broken in the middle by an old creaky gate. Opening the gate, you can see grass and weeds taller than Tenzing. Through the overgrowth there is a weathered sign above a door to a small building that reads - “School of Dhey.” Somberly Tenzing and Pema tiptoe towards the door. A rusty padlock blocks entry, but they can peak through the cracks in the warped wood. 
32
If you look through the crack you can see the dirt floor and grass growing inside. Tenzing shifts his weight to the right giving him a look through the crack into the far side of the room. “There is the chalkboard Pema! And I can see the desks piled up on the side.” Out of nowhere Pema grabs Tenzing and wrestles him away from the door laughing. Tenzing gets up and starts running through their old school yard, laughing, they run back towards their home, racing the fading afternoon sun.
33
Where everyone has gone talk about road going in. (road path from China)
When the community of Dhey decided to move towards the river and grow apples for a living, the concept was greeted with mixed reactions. Much of the community started to slowly relocate to the new riverside establishment of Chambale. They built new homes with traditional mud bricks, or cement brought in from surrounding villages while slowly hiking their possessions down from Dhey through a steep gorge. Around this time is when the community school was forced to shut down and all the school aged children started school an 8 day’s walk away in the village of Ghiling.
34
Some community members, however, did like the sound of the new plan and they chose to give up land that their family had owned for centuries and move to surrounding villages. These include Tange, Dhakmar, Syanboche, Chusang, and some even all the way to the city of Kathmandu. Many had to start from scratch picking up new skills and new occupations; others, simply moved in with distant relatives or friends.
35
Still others decided that they wouldn’t leave Dhey and they would try to make things work with the dwindling water supply. Many of the older members of the community, Sangbo’s parents Dorjay and Tashi included, were in this group. However, as the water further dried up, even the most fervent holdouts were deciding to move to Chambale. At this point, there were only a few people still living in Dhey surviving off of a small reservoir feeding a fraction of the fields they once planted.
36
Since the community of Dhey started their migration, they had acquired a tractor to help build up the new apple orchards. Recently they used this to build a shoddy road to help move things from one village to another. This road connecting to other villages is how Tenzing travelled to and from his new school in Ghiling.
37
Other road building projects are also afoot in Mustang. The Chinese have been funding a road connecting the Kora pass at the Tibetan-Nepali border with Kathmandu and then on to India. Altogether this road will be the lowest altitude corridor from China to India and is hugely important to China’s Belt and Road Initiative. Although this road stands to change the culture of Mustang significantly, it has also brought needed infrastructure to the region.
38
Family dinner talking about apple harvest and whether it’s bountiful or not
Stooping low, Sangbo enters his childhood home. A two story structure made of mud bricks. Everything, the floors, walls, beds, benches are all made of mud; a stark contrast to the small new cement house he and Lhakpa had recently constructed in Chambale. Tenzing and Pema almost knock him off his feet rushing out the door to play. 
39
Walking towards the stairs navigating through the smells wafting through the musty air feels like leafing through the pages of a childhood journal. You can smell the  fermenting barley beer he would have sipped on while watching goats; the pungent smell of curing meat hanging from the rafter; the smoked dusty buckwheat drying on a tarp in the corner. As he makes his way upstairs you can hear Lhakpa in the kitchen with his mother, Tashi. Winding his way around the stairs, he stoops through the door to the kitchen.
40
Over the next hour Sangbo and Lhakpa catch Tashi up on the happenings in the new village. Sitting on the well-packed dirt floor, Tashi stuffs a few cakes of yak dung into the stove where lentils are cooking. “Did you water the apples Sangbo?” “Of course I watered the apples,” Sangbo responds chuckling. Not amused, Tashi continues “so there was enough water then?” “Yes, yes there was enough water.” Sangbo continues but with reluctance, “there is enough water, but it seems like the apple harvest this year will not be good. We have only about half the apples we harvested last year.” 
41
Tashi looks up from the lentils and asks: “So how much did we earn from the apples this year?” Sangbo inhales the thin Himalayan air slowly, “That’s the other thing, our partner from the city, he has not sent the truck yet. It’s supposed to be here any day, but the apples are still sitting in the store room waiting to be packed.” Tashi purses her lips, slowly gets up, and brings the lentils into the next room. 
42
Tenzing and Pema's voices break the silence as they burst through the front door. “We are hungry!” yells Tenzing. Behind him his grandfather Dorjay echoes these sentiments.  Walking into the kitchen Dorjay drops his bundle of sticks on the ground. He had been high in the mountains with their herd of goats since dawn. While they graze Dorjay will collect sticks they use to supplement the yak dung patties for the stove. After greeting Sangbo and Lahkpa, Dorjay settles into the cushioned mud benches with a saucer of pungent barley wine. 
43
Discussion of where the apples have to go and different routes to get them there. 
Once the village of Dhey decided to grow apples, it was only the beginning of their problem solving. The new location had water and flat space to grow large orchards, but the soil was not good enough to sustain the apples. If they managed to grow, they still had to get them somewhere where people bought apples. Without a road directly leading to Chambale, the logistics of getting them out was going to be a difficult problem to solve. 
44
At the same time they started planting apples in Chambale, they scaled back on the fields they could support with the water in Dhey. This meant that they had more manure from the goats they could use for the apples. During their trips between the villages they would bring the goat manure down to the apple trees filling each tree ring with manure twice a year.
45
As the trees started to grow more quickly, they soon had apples ready to sell. A few community members found a business partner in the nearby city of Pokhara who would buy their apples, he would in turn sell them to a dealer in Kathmandu, who would sell them to the general public through a network of shop owners. 
46
Their partner also owned a freight truck built for offroad conditions. Once a year, shortly after the fall harvest, the truck would make its way to the last city connected by road passable with such a big truck. From here the truck would drive it’s way up the riverbed as long as the water had subsided enough. The river gorge led straight to chambale which meant that as long as the water conditions allowed, the truck should be able to pick up the apples and deliver them once a year. This year the water was high, which meant the truck was significantly delayed.
47
Going home making a decision raising a flag.
Over dinner Tenzing and Pema are particularly rambunctious and hungry after their adventures around Dhey. “you know Sangbo, Pema has not been behaving well. I feel like he could use some time with you and Lhakpa in Chambale.” Lhakpa smiles, “We would love for him to be with us, but we spend all of our time working with the apples - they are more work than most children. I don’t know if we would be able to keep up with Pema and the apples.” 
48
Dorjay, sipping on barley beer interrupts “what good are the apples doing us right now, Tashi and I are providing for the family right now with the goats and the fields. Even today I received an offer to buy several of our goats totalling almost more money than the poor apple harvest will bring in.” Sangbo seems slightly taken aback, but cooly responds: “we’ve been over this. The world is changing, the fields that you water today may be the last fields we ever water here. These changes are not temporary, water is not coming back. One day the glaciers will offer no more groundwater and we must prepare for that day.” “What about us? I’m 69, it’s not easy uprooting ourselves and changing our way of life at this age.” Dorjay shoots back. 
49
Looking around at his family Sangbo responds slowly “If we are to think about survival we must not think about how hard it is today, but what we need to do to ensure the survival of our children, their children, and their children more than 100 years from now. That’s why we send Tenzing away to school, why we spend every hour working with the apple trees, and why we can’t give up due to any one setback. Why is it up to us of all generations, I don’t know. But, for some reason, we’ve been given the responsibility and we must find a way.”

Brief map shot moving back down to Chambale
50
A week later, Lhakpa takes one final handful of apples and dumps them into a box. The truck arrived just in time. Everyone in Chambale is gathered together and packing the stores of apples into boxes for the journey to Kathmandu. The harvest was certainly much smaller than last year, but everyone seems to still be in high spirits. As she shoulders the last box and hands it up to Sangbo in the bed of the truck “That’s it Sangbo, the last box!” 
51
Sangbo jumps down out of the rusty truck bed and moves around the painted freight truck to the driver side door. “Thank you brother, have a safe drive up the river canyon.” with little more than a hand clasp and nod, the driver revs the engine belching dark smoke and oil onto the onlookers of Chambale. Lurching forward with their precious cargo in tow, the truck trundles over the rough path leading towards the river and away to Pokhara.
52
Sangbo and Lhakpa start the walk back towards their home in Chambale. Both stumble over the rough river rock paths of Chambale, they will likely never quite feel as comfortable as Dhey, but they stumble along. “Every day it feels more like home here” says Lahkpa. “Once we have a school for Tenzing and Pema, I hope our children can stay here permanently.” Sangbo smiles quietly. The river bordering the village rushes directly below the embankment they walk along. The sound of water blends with the sound of their future luring them ever closer to a new sustainable lifestyle in their high secluded corner of a changing planet. 
53
The sun hasn’t even risen behind the steep gorge of Dhey, but the Dorjay is already sitting next to the worn stone mill. His calloused hands rhythmically fill the grinding mortar with buckwheat. Tashi took the goats this morning and drained the small reservoir which got the mill started one more time. Listening to the water splash below, feels familiar but fleeting. Handful by handful, he quietly moves in time with the mill; each turn of the flat millstone like a clock ticking, each handful of buckwheat sucked through the churning stone like sand through an hourglass.
